Granular routing in Spin 2.5 (#1265)
fermyon/developer: content/spin/v2/http-trigger.md

Author: Just wondering what to mention inside the "Additional Request Information" section next.

component = "checkout"
```

> You can use wildcards to match 'patterns' of routes. Spin supports two kinds of wildcards: single-segment wildcards and trailing wildcards. A _wildcard_ route matches the given route and any route under it.  A route is a wildcard if it ends in `/...`.  For example, `/users/...` matches `/users`, `/users/1`, `/users/1/edit`, and so on.  Any of these routes will run the mapped component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use wildcards to match 'patterns' of routes. Spin supports two kinds of wildcards: single-segment wildcards and trailing wildcards.

A single-segment wildcard uses the syntax `:name`, where `name` is a name that identifies the wildcard. Such a wildcard will match only a single segment of a path, and allows further matching on segments beyond it. For example, `/users/:userid/edit` matches `/users/1/edit` and `/users/alice/edit`, but does not match `/users`, `/users/1`, or `/users/1/edit/cart`.

A trailing wildcard uses the syntax `/...` and matches the given route and any route under it.  For example, `/users/...` matches `/users`, `/users/1`, `/users/1/edit`, and so on. Any of these routes will run the mapped component.
```

component = "user-manager"
```

> Granular routing in Spin allows users to define dynamic routes where certain parts of the URL can change based on the input provided. A colon (`:`) precedes a variable segment in a URL. This variable segment captures part of the URL as a variable, which can be used in your route handler. For example, `/goodbye/:planet`. In this route, `:planet` is a variable segment. When a user accesses a URL like `/goodbye/mars`, the router matches this to the `/goodbye/:planet` pattern, and `mars` is captured as the value of `planet`.

Reviewer: I wouldn't use the term "granular routing" - from a user POV this isn't a distinct 'granular routing' feature, it's just another kind of wildcard.  How about we change line 67 to something like:

-----

You can use wildcards to match 'patterns' of routes.  Spin supports two kinds of wildcard: _single-segment_ wildcards and _trailing_ wildcards.

A single-segment wildcard uses the syntax `:name`, where `name` is a name that identifies the wildcard.  Such a wildcard will match only a single segment of a path, and allows further matching on segments beyond it.  For example, `/users/:userid/edit` matches `/users/1/edit` and `/users/alice/edit`, but does not match `/users`, `/users/1`, or `/users/1/edit/cart`.

A _trailing wildcard_ uses the syntax `/...` and matches the given route and any route under it. (then continues as current para and example)

You can combine single-segment and trailing wildcards in the same route, e.g. `/users/:userid/cart/...`.

See Additional Request Information _(link)_ for how to access wildcard values from your component.

-----

(I've suggested changing your planets example to something that meshes a bit more with the running example of users and shops, and perhaps motivates the concept a bit more.  If you prefer to keep the planets then no worries.)

Author: Updating in the next push

component = "user-manager"
```

> A single-segment wildcard uses the syntax `:name`, where `name` is a name that identifies the wildcard. Such a wildcard will match only a single segment of a path, and allows further matching on segments beyond it. For example, `/users/:userid/edit` matches `/users/1/edit` and `/users/alice/edit`, but does not match `/users`, `/users/1`, or `/users/1/edit/cart`.

Reviewer: remove if suggestion accepted (the suggestion moves this text to be part of the existing wildcard content)

> A trailing wildcard uses the syntax `/...` and matches the given route and any route under it.

Reviewer: remove (already covered by existing wildcard content, just slightly rephrased in the suggested revision to make a contrast withe single-segment wildcards)

component = "user-manager"
```

> You can use wildcards to match 'patterns' of routes. Spin supports two kinds of wildcard: single-segment wildcards and trailing wildcards.

Reviewer: These paragraphs (current lines 82-86) should replace the first two sentences of line 68, rather than appearing after the existing content.  That was why I didn't put the text as a GH suggestion - we have an existing discussion of wildcard routes and the new content should be part of that.

component = "shop"
```

### Private Endpoints

Private endpoints are where an internal microservice is not exposed to the network (does not have an HTTP route) and so is accessible only from within the application.

<!-- @nocpy -->

```toml
[[trigger.http]]
route = { private = true }
component = "internal"
```

> Private endpoints still require the `allowed_outbound_hosts` to be set. See [local service chaining documentation](./http-outbound#local-service-chaining) for more information about configuring self-requests (where the request is passed in memory without ever leaving the Spin host process).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To access a private endpoint, use [local service chaining](./http-outbound#local-service-chaining) (where the request is passed in memory without ever leaving the Spin host process). Such calls still require the internal endpoint to be included in `allowed_outbound_hosts`.
```

> In the following table, the examples suppose that:
> * Spin is listening on `example.com:8080`
> * The application `base` is `/shop`
> * The trigger `route` is `/users/:userid/cart/...`

> > * The request is to `https://example.com:8080/shop/users/1/cart/items/3`

Reviewer: Worth keeping the query string to show how it's affected?

Author: Sure thing, adding in now

| Header Name                  | Value                | Example |
|------------------------------|----------------------|---------|
| `spin-full-url`              | The full URL of the request. This includes full host and scheme information. | `https://example.com:8080/shop/users/1/cart/items/3` |
| `spin-path-info`             | The request path relative to the component route (including any base) | `/items/3` |

> | `spin-matched-route`         | The part of the request path that was matched by the route (including the base and wildcard indicator if present) | `/shop/users/:userid/cart/...` |

Reviewer: If that's the value then we might need to reword the description - this is no longer part of the request path, but rather the _trigger route_.

> In the following table, the examples suppose that:
> * Spin is listening on `example.com:8080`
> * The application `base` is `/shop`
> * The trigger `route` is `/users/:userid/cart/...`
> * The request is to `https://example.com:8080/shop/users/1/cart/items/3/edit?theme=pink`

| Header Name                  | Value                | Example |
|------------------------------|----------------------|---------|
| `spin-full-url`              | The full URL of the request. This includes full host and scheme information. | `https://example.com:8080/shop/users/1/cart/items/3/edit?theme=pink` |

> | `spin-path-info`             | The request path relative to the component route (including any base) | `/items/3` |

Reviewer: I forgot that we ought to add a pattern for single-segment wildcard values (e.g. the `:userid` being `"1"`).  I'm not sure the best way to do it given that these will vary with the name of the wildcard.
